<!-- Copyright 2024 Leonid Shlyapnikov. -->
<!-- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 -->

# Mechanism for lock-free Circular Buffer Wraparound

## Status

[ ] proposed, [X] accepted, [ ] rejected, [ ] deprecated, [ ] superseded

## Context

The diagram created with <https://asciiflow.com>.

```text
Message                                                 Wraparound
Counter        Circular Buffer                           Sync
 ┌────┐ ┌───────────┬───────────────┬──────────────┬──┐ ┌────┐
 │    │ │msg1       │msg2           │msg3          │  │ │    │
 └────┘ └───────────┴───────────────┴──────────────┴──┘ └────┘
```

When there is not enough space in the Circular Buffer and the Writer is not able to write a message into it, the Writer has to wraparound in a synchronized way. The proposed synchronization mechanism is to wait for all Readers to catch up with the Writer before Writer can wrap around and starts writing messages into the head of the Circular Buffer again.

Here is how the synchronization should work.

1. The Writer is not able to write a message because there is not enough space in the buffer.

2. The Writer resets Wraparound Sync to `0`.

3. The Writer marks the end of buffer.

   3.1. The Writer writes an empty message into the buffer. 2 bytes: `[0x00, 0x00]`, this is the length of the empty message. Empty message marks the end of buffer.

   3.2. If there is less than 2 bytes available in the buffer, the Writer will not be able to write an empty message into it. This is fine. The end of buffer marker is either an empty message or less than 2 bytes remaining/available in the buffer, this is how Readers should be able to identify the end of buffer.

4. The Writer increments the Message Counter to signal the Wraparound is initiated.

5. The Writer waits for all Readers to signal that they caught up with the Writer by updating a corresponding flag in the Wraparound Sync.

6. A Reader reaches the end of the buffer, which is either an empty message or less than 2 bytes remaining/available in the buffer. Keep in mind that the end of buffer (empty message) has its own Message Counter increment.

7. A Reader signals to the Writer that it reached the end of the buffer and caught up with it by updating a corresponding flag in the Wraparound Sync.

8. A Reader waits for the Message Counter to increment before it starts reading from the head of the Circular Buffer.

9. When all Readers caught up, the Writer writes a message into the head of the Circular Buffer (the message from step 1) and updates the Message Counter. This finalizes the Wraparound.

## Decision

Use the mechanism described above.

## Consequences

Lock-free message queue, lock-free Writer and Readers synchronization.

The Writer needs to know all Reader IDs in order to perform wraparound without lose of any message.
